Satan is the main peace-recker.
The scriptures tell us that he is driven by great anger.
His anger is malicious and uncontrolled.
Would any sound-minded God-fearing person allow himself to reflect Satan's vicious anger?
Of course not.
That is why all true servants of God are determined to put away uncontrolled anger.
But apart from uncontrolled anger, is all anger bad?
The Bible does not condemn all anger.
It teaches us that anger is wrong when it is uncontrolled or unjustified.
At Ephesians 4.26, God's Word tells us to be wrathful, but it adds do not sin.
At times, anger may simply be a strong feeling that comes into us because of being upset or annoyed
by something that we see as being wrong.
That in itself is not bad.
But what makes anger bad is when it fills a person's heart.
And here she just loses control of it.
When that happens, it may cause a person to act without a sound mind.
Those who continue to lash out an anger will not gain salvation.
Ephesians 5.20 lists fits of anger among the works of the flesh that will prevent a person
from inheriting God's kingdom.
There will be no place for such ones in God's new world.
A brief review of how uncontrolled anger wrecks peace for ourselves and others will highlight
why this is so.
Uncontrolled anger harms both the angry person as well as those around him.
We read at Proverbs 29-22 that an angry person stirs up strife, adding that he commits
many transgressions.
One of these many sins is abusive speech.
We must work to show restraint when speaking with workmates, with strangers in the ministry,
with our brothers and sisters in the congregation, and with our family members.
Bad feelings must be controlled.
A speech ridicule, contempt, and hateful anger are wrong.
Giving vent to such feelings can destroy precious friendships with other people and with
Jehovah.
Don't be like a volcano.
That will not quiet down.
Just like an erupting volcano will harm those living around it.
So too a person who expresses intense anger will harm those living around him.
He also damages himself in what way, acting on anger often leads to even more aggression.
So then uncontrolled anger can also affect our own peace.
It can cause us to do something that we will later regret.
It can have a negative effect on our health.
Medical studies show that uncontrolled anger can cause high blood pressure and respiratory
problems.
It can also affect the liver and pancreas, and such anger can cause digestive problems.
When a person becomes angry, he or she will not always think clearly.
After a fit of rage, a person may become depressed.
No wonder we read at Proverbs 14 and verse 30 that a calm heart gives life to the body.
The disastrous consequences of uncontrolled anger are illustrated in God's word by
the actions of Simeon and Levi, sons of the patriarch Jacob.
When they learned that their sister Dino was violated by a man named Sheikam, we read
a Genesis 34 and verse 7 that they were offended and very angry.
Now they had a valid reason to be angry, but they took their anger too far.
It was uncontrolled.
Simeon and Levi took vengeance on Sheikam.
Using deception, they attacked and killed every male in Sheikam city.
Then along with the other sons of Jacob, they plundered it and took the women and little
children captive.
Dino's tragic experience must have grieved Jacob greatly, yet he condemned his son's
uncontrolled anger.
Simeon and Levi tried to justify their actions, but that was not the end of the matter because
Jehovah was also displeased.
For this reason, Jacob later foretold that the descendants of Simeon and Levi were to
be scattered among the tribes of Israel.
Their uncontrolled anger brought disfavor from God and from their father Jacob.
Otherwise, to pay attention to such scriptural accounts and put away uncontrolled anger
and all of the harm that it brings.
In the following dramatization, notice how a person might be tempted to give in to anger.
Yes, Nana?
Don't forget eggs to you.
No, no, I didn't forget.
Are you sure?
No, I forget.
Okay.
Okay, love you.
Bye.
I've caught ya.
Do you have a minute?
Hi Emily.
Can we talk later?
I'm really struggling this morning.
Do you know, it's just, you've been so busy and I've been waiting for the right moment.
I really just like to address it.
Okay, what's up?
It's just that I've noticed you were post lately on QuickPost.
What about them?
Well, do you really think there's something that a pioneer should be posting?
What are you talking about?
Some people might think you're bragging.
Some people.
What people?
It's a business account.
I've got to show off my product.
No, I get that.
It's just, I don't know, it could feel like you're drawing a little too much attention
to yourself.
Who would think like that?
You.
No.
Not just me.
Celia felt the same.
You spoke to Celia about this.
I didn't want to upset you.
Jake said that I needed to take...
Jake!
...set everyone.
Things my posts are in approve.
Not everyone, Haley, that's not what I'm saying at all.
You are such...
I'm just trying to help you if you were just listening to me.
You're just...
Celia, listen to me.
Oh yeah, listen to me.
And I expected more from you.
Haley, what are you talking about?
Gossiping.
About my posts.
You're that lonely.
You've got nothing better to do.
Haley.
Were you left feeling a bit tense?
If so, you know what uncontrolled anger can lead to.
Now that we've defined uncontrolled anger
and considered what it can lead to,
the next question is,
how can we put away uncontrolled anger?
First, we need to recognize the danger of uncontrolled anger.
Proverbs 25-28 states
that as a city broken through, without a wall,
is the man who cannot control his temper.
Strong city walls were vital in ancient times.
Without them, a city would quickly fall to invaders,
likewise.
So will those who cannot control their temper.
By losing control,
they make themselves vulnerable to the invasion of wrong thoughts,
thoughts that can cause them to hurt themselves, and others.
Uncontrolled anger can do just that.
Next, after recognizing the danger,
we must pause and then deal with the anger
before it causes us to do something that we will regret.
When anger grows within us,
we're wise to recall what happened with Simeon and Levi.
We might also recall what happened
in the video dramatization that we just viewed.
You see, in each case,
pausing before reacting out of anger
may have spared much pain and heartache.
True?
That is why we have this warning at Proverbs 17 and verse 14.
Before the quarrel breaks out, take your leave.
With that in mind, each of us should ask himself,
do I tend to jump to conclusions
when I don't have all the facts?
If so, can I take my leave and put away anger
before it starts to build up?
The inspired advice found that James chapter 1 and verse 19
will help us to do so.
But only if we make a sincere and determined effort
to apply what it says.
Let's read that verse.
James chapter 1 and verse 19.
And here we find some simple steps
to help us put away uncontrolled anger.
It says, no this, my beloved brothers.
Everyone must be quick to listen, slow to speak,
slow to anger.
If we ask Jehovah to help us with this,
namely to be quick to listen, slow to speak,
slow to anger, he will assist us to do so.
He will help us to see the facts of a matter,
show understanding, and then put away uncontrolled anger.
A word of caution, though, to succeed in doing our part,
we must choose our associates wisely.
We could undermine all of our good work
and Jehovah's help in controlling our anger
if we choose associates who are arrogant,
opinionated, or quick to become angry.
Regarding someone who is disposed to rage,
Proverbs chapter 22 verse 25 warns,
never learn his ways.
Well, we've enjoyed another outstanding series of talks
that should help us to keep awake, maintain fine conduct,
and escape the judgment that will soon come in on this world.
As this symposium has emphasized,
we must do our utmost to continue to put away peace records
such as inappropriate boasting, envy, dishonesty,
harmful gossip, and uncontrolled anger.
If we have a problem with any of the peacemaking qualities
that we have discussed in this symposium,
seek Jehovah's hope to change and then work at it.
Our sincere efforts to pursue peace with our brothers
and our sisters will influence how earnestly
we are awaiting Jehovah's Day and his promised new world.
Yes, our genuine efforts will affect our hearts
and will be noticed by our Heavenly Father.
Then, in his great mercy,
Jehovah will consider us to be, as his word says,
spotless and unblemished and in peace,
both with him and with our fellow worshipers.